docs/proxied-mcp-servers.md, before:

# Proxied MCP Servers Architecture

## Overview

The SonarQube MCP Server can integrate with proxied MCP servers to expose their tools through a unified interface. This allows the server to dynamically extend its capabilities by connecting to specialized MCP servers that provide additional functionality.
The list of proxied servers cannot be modified at runtime, this is only used for internal servers approved by Sonar.

## Architecture

### Components

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│ SonarQubeMcpServer                                          │
│  ├─ Built-in Tools (analysis, projects, issues, etc.)      │
│  └─ Proxied Tools (from proxied MCP servers)               │
│      └─ ProxiedToolsLoader                                  │
│          ├─ ProxiedServerConfigParser                      │
│          ├─ McpClientManager                                │
│          │   └─ Multiple McpSyncClients                     │
│          └─ ProxiedMcpTool wrappers                         │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

## Configuration

### Configuration File

Proxied MCP servers are defined in `/proxied-mcp-servers.json` (bundled in the JAR):

```json
[
  {
    "name": "my-server",
    "namespace": "myserver",
    "command": "node",
    "args": ["path/to/mcp-server.js"],
    "env": {},
    "supportedTransports": ["stdio"]
  }
]
```

**Fields:**
- `name` (required): Human-readable server name (for logging)
- `namespace` (required): Tool name prefix (e.g., tool `analyze` becomes `context/analyze`)
- `command` (required): Executable command to start the MCP server
- `args` (optional): Command-line arguments
- `env` (optional): Environment variables (merged with parent process environment; config values override parent values)
- `supportedTransports` (required): Array of transport modes supported by this provider. Valid values: `"stdio"`, `"http"`. Providers are only loaded if they support the server's current transport mode.
- `instructions` (optional): Brief instructions to help AI assistants use this provider's tools effectively. These are automatically appended to the server's base instructions.

### Tool Namespacing

Proxied tools are prefixed with their namespace to avoid conflicts with the main server's tools, following the [MCP SEP-986 naming convention](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/community/seps/986-specify-format-for-tool-names):
- Server namespace: `context`
- Original tool name: `analyze_code`
- Exposed name: `context/analyze_code`

**Tool Name Validation:**

All tool names (both proxied and internal) are validated according to MCP SEP-986:
- **Length:** 1-64 characters
- **Allowed characters:** Alphanumeric (a-z, A-Z, 0-9), underscore (_), dash (-)
- **Case-sensitive:** `getUser`, `GetUser`, and `GETUSER` are different tool names
- **No spaces or special characters:** Spaces, commas, @, #, etc. are not allowed

If a proxied server exposes a tool with an invalid name, it will be automatically skipped with an error logged.

## Auto-Discovery

### Production Behavior

The server **always attempts to load all configured proxied servers** at startup:

1. Parse `proxied-mcp-servers.json`
2. Validate configuration
3. Filter proxied servers by transport compatibility (skip servers that don't support current transport mode)
4. For each proxied server:
    - Attempt to execute the command
    - If successful: connect, discover tools, integrate them
    - If failed: log warning, continue without that server

**Example output:**
```
INFO: Initializing 2 proxied MCP server(s)...
INFO: Connected to 'caas' - discovered 5 tool(s)
WARN: Failed to initialize 'python-tools': command 'python' not found
INFO: Loaded 5 proxied tool(s) from 1/2 server(s)
```

**Key principle:** The server never fails to start due to proxied server issues. It gracefully degrades and continues with available servers.

## Adding a New Proxied Server

### 1. Add Configuration

Edit `src/main/resources/proxied-mcp-servers.json`:

```json
[
  {
    "name": "my-server",
    "namespace": "myserver",
    "command": "node",
    "args": ["path/to/mcp-server.js"],
    "env": {
      "NODE_ENV": "production"
    },
    "supportedTransports": ["stdio"],
    "instructions": "Before analyzing code issues, always use myprovider_my_tool to retrieve relevant code snippets."
  }
]
```

### 2. Install Dependencies

Ensure the runtime environment has required dependencies:
- Update `Dockerfile` if needed
- Document dependencies in README

### 3. Test

Start the server - the proxied server will auto-discover:
- If dependencies are available → server loads successfully
- If dependencies are missing → warning logged, server continues

## Environment Variables

Proxied MCP servers automatically inherit **all environment variables** from the parent SonarQube MCP Server process. This means:

- If the main server has `ABC=xyz` in its environment, proxied servers can access it
- Config-specific `env` values **override** inherited parent environment variables
- This allows proxied servers to access secrets and configuration from the main server environment

**Example:**
```json
{
  "name": "my-server",
  "namespace": "myserver",
  "command": "python",
  "args": ["-m", "my_mcp_server"],
  "env": {
    "DEBUG": "true"
  }
}
```

If the main server is launched with:
```bash
export ABC=xyz
export DEBUG=false
export ANOTHER_VAR=value
java -jar sonar-mcp-server.jar
```

The proxied MCP server will receive:
- `ABC=xyz` (inherited from parent)
- `DEBUG=true` (overridden by config)
- `ANOTHER_VAR=value` (inherited from parent)
- Plus all other parent environment variables

## Security Considerations

- Configuration file is **bundled in JAR** and cannot be modified at runtime
- Proxied servers execute with same permissions as main server process
- Proxied servers inherit the parent process environment, including sensitive variables
- Config `env` values can override parent environment variables if needed
- Server commands must be trusted (arbitrary command execution)

Commit message:

MCP-281 Clean up proxied servers logic

docs/proxied-mcp-servers.md, after:

# Proxied MCP Servers Architecture

## Overview

The SonarQube MCP Server can integrate with proxied MCP servers to expose their tools through a unified interface. This allows the server to dynamically extend its capabilities by connecting to specialized MCP servers that provide additional functionality.
The list of proxied servers cannot be modified at runtime, this is only used for internal servers approved by Sonar.

## Architecture

### Components

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│ SonarQubeMcpServer                                          │
│  ├─ Built-in Tools (analysis, projects, issues, etc.)      │
│  └─ Proxied Tools (from proxied MCP servers)               │
│      └─ ProxiedToolsLoader                                  │
│          ├─ ProxiedServerConfigParser                      │
│          ├─ McpClientManager                                │
│          │   └─ Multiple McpSyncClients                     │
│          └─ ProxiedMcpTool wrappers                         │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

## Configuration

### Configuration File

Proxied MCP servers are defined in `/proxied-mcp-servers.json` (bundled in the JAR):

```json
[
  {
    "name": "my-server",
    "namespace": "myserver",
    "command": "node",
    "args": ["path/to/mcp-server.js"],
    "env": {},
    "supportedTransports": ["stdio"]
  }
]
```

**Fields:**
- `name` (required): Human-readable server name (for logging)
- `namespace` (required): Tool name prefix (e.g., tool `analyze` becomes `context_analyze`)
- `command` (required): Executable command to start the MCP server
- `args` (optional): Command-line arguments
- `env` (optional): Environment variables (merged with parent process environment; config values override parent values)
- `supportedTransports` (required): Array of transport modes supported by this provider. Valid values: `"stdio"`, `"http"`. Providers are only loaded if they support the server's current transport mode.
- `instructions` (optional): Brief instructions to help AI assistants use this provider's tools effectively. These are automatically appended to the server's base instructions.

### Tool Namespacing

Proxied tools are prefixed with their namespace to avoid conflicts with the main server's tools:
- Server namespace: `context`
- Original tool name: `analyze_code`
- Exposed name: `context_analyze_code`

**Tool Name Validation:**

All tool names (both proxied and internal) are validated according to MCP SEP-986:
- **Length:** 1-64 characters
- **Allowed characters:** Alphanumeric (a-z, A-Z, 0-9), underscore (_), dash (-)
- **Case-sensitive:** `getUser`, `GetUser`, and `GETUSER` are different tool names
- **No spaces or special characters:** Spaces, commas, @, #, etc. are not allowed

If a proxied server exposes a tool with an invalid name, it will be automatically skipped with an error logged.

## Auto-Discovery

### Production Behavior

The server **always attempts to load all configured proxied servers** at startup:

1. Parse `proxied-mcp-servers.json`
2. Validate configuration
3. Filter proxied servers by transport compatibility (skip servers that don't support current transport mode)
4. For each proxied server:
    - Attempt to execute the command
    - If successful: connect, discover tools, integrate them
    - If failed: log warning, continue without that server

**Example output:**
```
INFO: Initializing 2 proxied MCP server(s)...
INFO: Connected to 'caas' - discovered 5 tool(s)
WARN: Failed to initialize 'python-tools': command 'python' not found
INFO: Loaded 5 proxied tool(s) from 1/2 server(s)
```

**Key principle:** The server never fails to start due to proxied server issues. It gracefully degrades and continues with available servers.

### Logging

Diagnostic logs from proxied MCP servers are automatically captured and logged:

**Standard Error (stderr) Logging:**
- According to MCP protocol, servers send diagnostic logs to stderr
- The SonarQube MCP server captures and logs stderr from all proxied servers at INFO level
- All logs are prefixed with the server name (e.g., `[sonar-cag] <log message>`)
- This allows you to see what's happening inside proxied servers for debugging

**Controlling Log Output:**
- Use the `logback.xml` configuration to filter logs by logger name or level
- Stderr output is logged via the `org.sonarsource.sonarqube.mcp.client.McpClientManager` logger
- Example: Set `<logger name="org.sonarsource.sonarqube.mcp.client.McpClientManager" level="DEBUG"/>` to see all proxied server output

## Adding a New Proxied Server

### 1. Add Configuration

Edit `src/main/resources/proxied-mcp-servers.json`:

```json
[
  {
    "name": "my-server",
    "namespace": "myserver",
    "command": "node",
    "args": ["path/to/mcp-server.js"],
    "env": {
      "NODE_ENV": "production"
    },
    "supportedTransports": ["stdio"],
    "instructions": "Before analyzing code issues, always use myprovider_my_tool to retrieve relevant code snippets."
  }
]
```

### 2. Install Dependencies

Ensure the runtime environment has required dependencies:
- Update `Dockerfile` if needed
- Document dependencies in README

### 3. Test

Start the server - the proxied server will auto-discover:
- If dependencies are available → server loads successfully
- If dependencies are missing → warning logged, server continues

## Environment Variables

Proxied MCP servers automatically inherit **all environment variables** from the parent SonarQube MCP Server process. This means:

- If the main server has `ABC=xyz` in its environment, proxied servers can access it
- Config-specific `env` values **override** inherited parent environment variables
- This allows proxied servers to access secrets and configuration from the main server environment

**Example:**
```json
{
  "name": "my-server",
  "namespace": "myserver",
  "command": "python",
  "args": ["-m", "my_mcp_server"],
  "env": {
    "DEBUG": "true"
  }
}
```

If the main server is launched with:
```bash
export ABC=xyz
export DEBUG=false
export ANOTHER_VAR=value
java -jar sonar-mcp-server.jar
```

The proxied MCP server will receive:
- `ABC=xyz` (inherited from parent)
- `DEBUG=true` (overridden by config)
- `ANOTHER_VAR=value` (inherited from parent)
- Plus all other parent environment variables

## Security Considerations

- Configuration file is **bundled in JAR** and cannot be modified at runtime
- Proxied servers execute with same permissions as main server process
- Proxied servers inherit the parent process environment, including sensitive variables
- Config `env` values can override parent environment variables if needed
- Server commands must be trusted (arbitrary command execution)
